Create mentoring.md for Say (#2211)
exercism/website-copy: tracks/python/exercises/say/mentoring.md

# Mentoring

## Problems and Challenges
This problem requires the student to transform an integer (0 <= n < 1,000,000,000,000) into its full English equivalent, and raise an exception for values outside that range.
Take note of the tests - the use of 'and' as a separator is not required, and adding it will cause the tests to fail, but it is suggested as an extension exercise. 

## Reasonable Solution
```
digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()
teens = "ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen nineteen".split()
tens = ["", ""] + "twenty thirty forty fifty sixty seventy eighty ninety".split()
denominations = (9, "billion"), (6, "million"), (3, "thousand"), (2, "hundred")

def say(number):
    if 0 > number or number > 999999999999:
        raise ValueError("input out of range")

>     if number < 20 and number >= 10:

Reviewer: Python supports comparison chaining:  `if 10 <= number < 20:`

Author: Thanks!

        return teens[number % 10]
    if number < 100:

>         if number // 10 and number % 10:

Reviewer: Is the first test here trying to do `number > 10`? Doing that directly would be more explicit and easier to understand.

Author: Not quite sure what you mean - numbers 11 to 19 inclusive are handled specially so line 17 is just to isolate those. Or are you referring to line 20? That checks whether both the 10s digit and the ones digit are non zero, since we then need to use a hyphen. It's also possible to check those values directly before using join, but that requires separate handling of the zero case.

Reviewer: The first test on line 20. I believe `number // 10`  is testing `number >= 10` in a less direct and less obvious manner.

Reviewer 2: This can be changed in a future PR

            return "-".join([tens[number // 10], digits[number % 10]])
        else:
            return tens[number // 10] or digits[number % 10] or "zero"
    for k, denomination in denominations:
        if number > 10**k - 1:
            result = [say(number // 10**k), denomination]
            if number % 10 ** k:
                result.append(say(number % 10**k))
            return " ".join(result)
```
Or without using recursion:
```

> def say3(number):

Reviewer: `say3` isn't a very description function name. Maybe `say_small`?

Author: I've changed it to `say_three_digits`

    hundreds_col, tens_col, ones_col = number // 100, number // 10 % 10, number % 10
    result = [str(digits[hundreds_col]) + " hundred"] if hundreds_col else []
    if tens_col == 1:
        result.append(teens[ones_col])
    elif tens_col and ones_col:
        result.append("-".join([tens[tens_col], digits[ones_col]]))
    else:
        result.append(tens[tens_col] or digits[ones_col])
    return result

def say(number):
    if 0 > number or number > 999999999999:
        raise ValueError("input out of range")
    result = []
    for k, denomination in denominations:
        if number > 10**k - 1:
            result += say3(number // 10**k)
            result += [denomination]
            number %= 10**k
    return " ".join(e for e in result if e) or "zero"
```

## Common Suggestions

### Defining the literals
Typically this problem will begin with defining the literals needed. 

> These can be done as either lists or dicts, but most students will fine dicts easier to work with for this problem. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These can be done as either lists or dictionaries; many students will find dictionaries easier to work with for this problem. 
```

Encourage the student to define these at the start rather than embedding them in their code.

### Values below 1000
Next, the instructions suggest begining by creating a function which works for values of up to three digits.
The return value of this function will typically be a string, but it can also be a list of strings for later assembly.
Whether in this function or for the final return, encourage them to use a list and combine the elements using `str.join`.

The main challenges are ensuring that the 'hundred' denominator is conditionally included and that the tens and ones columns are joined with a hyphen if they are both present.

> Simple `if` checks for each of these conditions are the most straightforward approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simple `if` checks for each of these conditions is the most straightforward approach.
```

Another valid approach is to only handle values below 100, and instead handle the hundreds alongside the other denominators.
This approach typically requires the use of recursion. 

### Larger numbers
Encourage the student to use the first function they wrote for each set of three digits rather than duplicating code.
Each set of three can be checked individually and conditionally added along with the appropriate denominator, or alternatively the denominators can be stored in a list and iterated over.

### Zero or invalid input
Finally, the student must add a guard that returns a `ValueError` if the input is out of range. 
A guard is also the easiest way to handle the zero case, but this can also be handled through short circuit evaluation.

### Parsing the number
The number needs to be broken up into groups of three. 
This can be handled either with numeric operators or by casting to a string.

> Generally a student will find it easier to work with the number as a string for this problem, but both approaches are valid.

Reviewer: Is there data to support this claim? Does this claim help the mentor? What is the purpose of this sentence?

Author: Line 85? I would have thought indexing a string would be easier for most students than using numeric operators to isolate a particular digit, but you're right that it's just my intuition, so I'll update that line.

## Talking points

> The student should be familiar with comprehensions - if they aren't, introduce the concept as they are very useful here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List comprehensions are very useful for this exercise.
```

Avoid talking about what students should or should not be familiar with. Stick to advising the mentor about what they should think about and discuss.

There are a wide variety of valid approaches to this problem, which gives students a lot of opportunity to experiment and encounter new ways of manipulating data.
Some useful techniques that students might not have encountered are listed below.

> Students will not need or want to use all of these, but mentors should look for opportunities in the student's code to introduce one or more of them.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this list of functions is super helpful when mentoring an exercise. As a mentor, I'd want to see discussions on approaches and solutions at a higher level, not specific string methods which may or may not be useful here.

Author: I do see your point about the specificity of some lines - 97, 99-101 are probably unnecessary. But since there's a lot going on in this exercise, I figured having a list of suggested techniques would be helpful as a quick reference - if a mentor scans this list before reading the student's code they'll more likely spot that a certain piece of code might make use of something here and be a good opportunity to introduce it to the student. Otherwise many of these wouldn't come to mind without more time spent on the exercise. I think it can be quite helpful to be introduced to a technique through a real example where it improves the code you've already written - getting a sense of when some of these would be useful is harder in contrived examples imo, but for slightly less common constructions it's easy to miss good opportunities to teach them.

* Casting between numeric types and strings
* String indexing, iteration, formatting, or concatenation
* String methods such as `zfill`, `isnumeric`, `split`, or `join`
* List concatenation using the `+` operator
* List methods such as `append` or `extend`
* Iterator functions such as `zip`, `enumerate`, or `filter`
* Assignment operators
* Unpacking operator
* Short circuit evaluation and the use of `or`/`and` for control flow

> * Ternery if-else

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ternery operator
```

Author: I've changed it to 'ternary conditional operator'

* Integer division and modulo operators, and the divmod function
* Recusion

Students who wish to extend the exercise can rewrite the function to include 'and' as a seperator as well as handle negative or larger numbers.
This will require rewriting the tests, which might also serve as a learning opportunity for the student.

This problem is a good opportunity to practice writing concise code and balancing readability. 

> It is also a good chance to code verbosely while the problem is solved, and then iterate on the solution to reduce length and complexity, so don't require the student to write concise code on every iteration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also a good chance to code verbosely while the problem is solved, and then iterate on the solution to reduce length and complexity.
```

Avoid telling the mentor to do things or not do things. Provide discussion points and concepts which are useful for solving the exercise.

A terse solution which demonstrates some techniques:
```
digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()
teens = "ten eleven twelve thir four fif six seven eigh nine".split()
tens = ["", ""] + "twenty thirty forty fifty sixty seventy eighty ninety".split()

> denominations = (9, 'billion'), (6, 'million'), (3, 'thousand'), (2, 'hundred')

Reviewer: This code uses both double quotes and single quotes. Either is fine, but avoid mixing and matching! Consistent code is good code.

I'm also not sure what the value of this code block is. Is there something specific this is calling to a mentor's attention?

Author: Thanks, I've fixed the quotes.

Basically since there's a lot of different techniques that can be applied here I wanted to give a third example to cover some more of them. It isn't necessarily intended to show best practice, but some of the techniques used would be suitable for a student to use. I put it at the end because there's already two examples at the top.

# Mentoring

> ## Problems and Challenges
> This problem requires the student to transform an integer (0 <= n < 1,000,000,000,000) into its full English equivalent, and raise an exception for values outside that range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Problems and Challenges

This problem requires the student to transform an integer (0 <= n < 1,000,000,000,000) into its full English equivalent, and raise an exception for values outside that range.
```

Take note of the tests - the use of 'and' as a separator is not required, and adding it will cause the tests to fail, but it is suggested as an extension exercise. 

> ## Reasonable Solution
> ```
> digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
## Reasonable Solution

```python
digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()
````

teens = "ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen nineteen".split()
tens = ["", ""] + "twenty thirty forty fifty sixty seventy eighty ninety".split()
denominations = (9, "billion"), (6, "million"), (3, "thousand"), (2, "hundred")

def say(number):
    if 0 > number or number > 999999999999:
        raise ValueError("input out of range")
    if 10 <= number < 20:
        return teens[number % 10]
    if number < 100:
        if number // 10 and number % 10:
            return "-".join([tens[number // 10], digits[number % 10]])
        else:
            return tens[number // 10] or digits[number % 10] or "zero"
    for k, denomination in denominations:
        if number > 10**k - 1:
            result = [say(number // 10**k), denomination]
            if number % 10 ** k:
                result.append(say(number % 10**k))
            return " ".join(result)
```

> Or without using recursion:
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
Or without using recursion:

```python
````

denominations = (9, "billion"), (6, "million"), (3, "thousand"), (0, "")

def say_three_digits(number):
    hundreds_col, tens_col, ones_col = number // 100, number // 10 % 10, number % 10
    result = [str(digits[hundreds_col]) + " hundred"] if hundreds_col else []
    if tens_col == 1:
        result.append(teens[ones_col])
    elif tens_col and ones_col:
        result.append("-".join([tens[tens_col], digits[ones_col]]))
    else:
        result.append(tens[tens_col] or digits[ones_col])
    return result

def say(number):
    if 0 > number or number > 999999999999:
        raise ValueError("input out of range")
    result = []
    for k, denomination in denominations:
        if number > 10**k - 1:
            result += say_three_digits(number // 10**k)
            result += [denomination]
            number %= 10**k
    return " ".join(e for e in result if e) or "zero"
```

## Common Suggestions

> ### Defining the literals
> Typically this problem will begin with defining the literals needed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Defining the literals

Typically this problem will begin with defining the literals needed. 
```

These can be done as either lists or dictionaries; many students will find dictionaries easier to work with for this problem. 
Encourage the student to define these at the start rather than embedding them in their code.

> ### Values below 1000
> Next, the instructions suggest begining by creating a function which works for values of up to three digits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Values below 1000

Next, the instructions suggest beginning by creating a function which works for values of up to three digits.
```

The return value of this function will typically be a string, but it can also be a list of strings for later assembly.
Whether in this function or for the final return, encourage them to use a list and combine the elements using `str.join`.

The main challenges are ensuring that the 'hundred' denominator is conditionally included and that the tens and ones columns are joined with a hyphen if they are both present.
Simple `if` checks for each of these conditions is the most straightforward approach.

Another approach is to only handle values below 100, and instead handle the hundreds alongside the other denominators.
This typically requires the use of recursion. 

> ### Larger numbers
> Encourage the student to use the first function they wrote for each set of three digits rather than duplicating code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Larger numbers

Encourage the student to use the first function they wrote for each set of three digits rather than duplicating code.
```

Each set of three can be checked individually and conditionally added along with the appropriate denominator, or alternatively the denominators can be stored in a list and iterated over.

> ### Zero or invalid input
> Finally, the student must add a guard that returns a `ValueError` if the input is out of range. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Zero or invalid input

Finally, the student must add a guard that returns a `ValueError` if the input is out of range. 
```

A guard is also the easiest way to handle the zero case, but this can also be handled through short circuit evaluation.

> ### Parsing the number
> The number needs to be broken up into groups of three as well as isolating each digit. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Parsing the number

The number needs to be broken up into groups of three as well as isolating each digit. 
```

Two common approaches are to use the `//` and `%` operators or to cast the integer to a string and access the digits by indexing or iterating.

> ## Talking Points
> List comprehensions are very useful for this exercise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Talking Points

List comprehensions are very useful for this exercise.
```

There are a wide variety of valid approaches to this problem, which gives students a lot of opportunity to experiment and encounter new ways of manipulating data.
Some useful techniques that students might not have encountered are listed below.
Students will not need or want to use all of these, but mentors should look for opportunities in the student's code to introduce one or more of them.
* Casting between numeric types and strings
* String indexing, iteration, formatting, or concatenation
* String methods such as `zfill`, `isnumeric`, `split`, or `join`
* List concatenation using the `+` operator
* List methods such as `append` or `extend`
* Iterator functions such as `zip`, `enumerate`, or `filter`
* Assignment operators
* Unpacking operator
* Short circuit evaluation and the use of `or`/`and` for control flow
* Ternary conditional operator
* Integer division and modulo operators, and the divmod function
* Recusion

> Students who wish to extend the exercise can rewrite the function to include 'and' as a seperator as well as handle negative or larger numbers.

Reviewer 3: seperator -> separator

> Students who wish to extend the exercise can rewrite the function to include 'and' as a seperator as well as handle negative or larger numbers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Students who wish to extend the exercise can rewrite the function to include 'and' as a separator as well as handle negative or larger numbers.
```

This will require rewriting the tests, which might also serve as a learning opportunity for the student.

This problem is a good opportunity to practice writing concise code and balancing readability. 
It is also a good chance to code verbosely while the problem is solved, and then iterate on the solution to reduce length and complexity.
A terse solution which demonstrates some techniques:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```python
````

digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()
teens = "ten eleven twelve thir four fif six seven eigh nine".split()
tens = ["", ""] + "twenty thirty forty fifty sixty seventy eighty ninety".split()
denominations = (9, "billion"), (6, "million"), (3, "thousand"), (2, "hundred")

def say(n):
    if 0 > n or n > 999999999999:
        raise ValueError("input out of range")

>     if n < 20 and n >= 10:

Reviewer 3: `10 <= n < 20`

>     if n < 20 and n >= 10:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if 10 <= n < 20:
```

Students will not need or want to use all of these, but mentors should look for opportunities in the student's code to introduce one or more of them.
* Casting between numeric types and strings
* String indexing, iteration, formatting, or concatenation
* String methods such as `zfill`, `isnumeric`, `split`, or `join`
* List concatenation using the `+` operator
* List methods such as `append` or `extend`
* Iterator functions such as `zip`, `enumerate`, or `filter`
* Assignment operators
* Unpacking operator
* Short circuit evaluation and the use of `or`/`and` for control flow
* Ternary conditional operator
* Integer division and modulo operators, and the divmod function
* Recusion

Students who wish to extend the exercise can rewrite the function to include 'and' as a separator as well as handle negative or larger numbers.
This will require rewriting the tests, which might also serve as a learning opportunity for the student.

This problem is a good opportunity to practice writing concise code and balancing readability. 
It is also a good chance to code verbosely while the problem is solved, and then iterate on the solution to reduce length and complexity.

> A terse solution which demonstrates some techniques:
> ```python
> digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
A terse solution which demonstrates some techniques:

```python
digits = [""] + "one two three four five six seven eight nine".split()
````
